Hey, guys.
Welcome to the Swift
Deep Dive on protocols. In this deep dive,
Wwe're going to be talking about what Swift protocols are and what they allow us to do.
So the way I like to think about protocols is imagine it as a certification that you have in your CV
or your resume.
So for example, in my LinkedIn profile, I've got a bunch of certificates that I've listed. And one of those
certificates is something called Advanced Life Support.
So this is something that every doctor in the UK has to complete and it's a two-day course where we
learn a whole bunch of things, including how to deliver CPR to resuscitate people who might have had
a cardiac arrest.
Similarly in Swift, we can create these protocols or certifications if you will that have a bunch of
requirements. And when our classes or our structs adopt this protocol, it means that they are able to
meet these requirements and have these skills. For example, performing CPR or resuscitating somebody who's
unconscious.
So the way that we define our protocol starts with the protocol keyword.
And then we give it a name. And similar to structure and classes,
it's also named starting with a capital letter. And then in between a set of curly braces, we can define
the requirements of this protocol.
So let's take a look at this in more detail.
I'm gonna head over to Xcode and create a new project and I'm gonna select the macOS command line
tool to be able to allow us to see multiple files.
I'm gonna call this product name Protocols Demo and then go ahead and hit next. And then you can save
it wherever you want.
Now, inside my Main.swift, I'm actually going to delete everything that's in there because we don't need
any of it to write the code. Protocols is a fundamental aspect of Swift and it doesn't rely upon anything
else.
Now, let's write some code to see what problems protocols can solve.
The first thing I'm gonna do is I'm going to create a new class and my class is going to be a Bird class
and I'm going to define a bunch of things that birds can do.
So for example, birds can usually fly.
And so I've got a fly method in my Bird class.
And when my bird flies, all that it does is it flaps its wings and it lifts off into the sky.
So I'm going to create a very simple print statement to represent this functionality of a bird.
Now, in addition, if a bird is female, then they can also lay eggs, right?
So let's create this layEgg functionality where we check to make sure. If our bird is female, then in
that case, we can go ahead and print "The bird makes a new bird in a shell."
So here we've got our Bird class created. And based on what we learned in our classes Deep Dive, we know
that we can inherit from different classes.
So if I created another class, let's say, I create a Eagle class and it's going to be inheriting from
the Bird class.
So now I've got this Eagle subclass which inherits from my Bird class. The Eagle now gets access to everything
a bird can do.
So, for example, let's create our own Eagle. Let's call it myEagle and it's going to be a new Eagle object
created from the Eagle class blueprint.
And then I could say, well, myEagle, you can fly, myEagle if it's female, it can lay eggs, and we've set
everything by default as female. So our eagle is able to fly and lay eggs. Pretty simple so far.
Now, in our Eagle class, let's say that our Eagles are able to do something a little bit more specialized
that maybe not all birds can do.
Maybe it can also soar. So our Eagle is able to take advantage of the air currents. And using the warm air,
it's able to glide through the air using these air currents and not all birds are able to lock their
wings and do this apparently.
Now, our Eagle is also in addition to everything it got from the bird class that it inherited,
it's also able to soar.
So now we've created are Bird class, we're able to inherit from our Bird class, and that's all just a
review so far. At this point, you might be wondering, "Well, where's the problem here?"
This is a really good time to use inheritance,
right?
Well, let's say that a couple months down the line, we create another class, myPenguin class which is
also going to inherit from the Bird class.
Penguins are indeed birds.
They have wings and they have feathers. And penguins, in addition, can also swim.
So my penguin is able to paddle through the water.
So let's say that we create an object from our Penguin class. We'll call it myPenguin.
And this is, of course, created from the Penguin class and we initialize it
And now my penguin is able to lay eggs.
It's able to swim. But curiously, it's also able to fly. It inherited that method because it's a bird.
But as you may already know, penguins can't actually fly.
Their wings are far too small to be able to support themselves in air. Now, we have a bit of a problem,
right?
We want to be able to define the penguin as a subtype of birds, but we don't really want it to inherit
the fly method.
So this is the first problem we run into our Penguin is inheriting some functionality that it shouldn't
have,
And this can lead to unintended consequences like a flying Penguin. Let's say that we had a flying museum,
right? Let's call it FlyingMuseum and let's create as a structure because we don't need to inherit anything,
we don't need any of the class features.
So let's say that we have our flying museum which puts on these flying demos every so often. And in these
demos, it takes a flying object.
So it has to be able to fly to be able to do this demo.
So the flying object, we're going to say it's of type bird, because we know that all birds can fly.
They have this function fly in their class definition.
So now when our flyingMuseum puts on the flyingDemo, well, all it does is it collects all of these things
that can fly,
and it gets the flying object to fly.
So now let's create our museum, which is a flying museum, and our museum puts on a show, a flyingDemo.
So let's huddle up all of our birds that we have access to in our museum and let's get myEagle to be passed
in as the input to the flyingDemo.
So now if I run this code as it is, you can see that once it's done running, I get the bird flaps its
wings and lifts off into the sky.
So the only reason why I'm able to do this is because I was able to pass myEagle, which is an eagle
type, into the flyingDemo as a flyingObject because the Eagle class inherits from the bird Class, and
therefore, it's also a bird type which, therefore, satisfies the data type of this input.
So it's able to be used in my flyingDemo.
Now, similarly, if I create my penguin and I pass in myPenguin,
and when I run my code, we get a flying penguin and a very surprised audience at the museum's flying
demo.
This is the kind of unintended behavior I was talking about. The entire code base assumes that all birds
can fly, but we have one bird that clearly shouldn't be flying.
So the problem is that we're relying too heavily on inheritance and subclassing. Say, your app has become
a huge hit and now you want to have flying behavior in other parts of your code,
well, birds shouldn't be the only thing your museum is showing off in the flying demo, right?
So how would you get that to work?
Let's say that I had a structure that's an airplane. And my airplane,
well, I also want to say that, well, airplanes can fly, right?
So at the moment, the only things that can fly are birds.
That's the one that has the fly method implemented.
And if I want to be able to use my airplane in my flying demo, well, then it kind of has to be a bird
type because that's the only thing that I can put in here.
If I just had an airplane struct that I created down here, let myPlane equals Airplane, and I tried to
pass in myPlane in here as the input,
well, then I'm going to get an error because this has a type of airplane which is not in any way related
to type bird which is what I'm making a requirement as the input type.
So what can we do?
Well, we could force our code to work by making our airplane a type of bird. But now we have a problem
because structures cannot inherit.
So let's go ahead and fudge our code a little bit more and turn our airplane into a class to make it
inherit from bird.
So now that works, but let's see what happens when we put our plane into the flyingDemo.
It says that the bird flaps its wings and lifts off into the sky.
But, actually, wait a minute.
It's a--it's an airplane.
What's going on here?
Well, it's because the plane inherits from bird which has the implementation of fly and fly says that
the bird flaps its wings and lifts off into the sky which is fair enough for birds.
But it's very weird for an airplane to flap its wings.
So while we could, let's say, override our methods fly. And, you know, for airplanes we could print, instead,
that the airplane uses its engine to lift off into the air.
And now, I've kind of forced my code to work because this is now what we're getting in our flyingDemo.
But there are headaches with this way of doing things.
For example, my plane is now able to lay eggs which makes absolutely zero sense, whatsoever.
So how can we solve this problem?
How can we separate the flying behavior from the bird class?
How can we have both classes and structures that can fly?
Remember that inheritance only works for classes.
So maybe we shouldn't be using inheritance to get hold of the flying functionality at all.
And this is where protocols come to the rescue.
So let me just clear up my code a little bit to make it easier to see what's going on.
And right at the top, I'm going to declare a protocol. The name of my protocol is going to be called
CanFly.
And this is, basically, like the certificate that I mentioned before.
So everybody that can fly,
they've gone to the flying training.
They have this capability of flying. But in order for you to be someone that can fly or something that
can fly,
well, we have some requirements.
You must be able to implement a fly method.
Now, notice how this fly method that goes into the protocol doesn't actually have an implementation.
It doesn't have a set of curly braces which defines how it should be flying.
And in fact, if you try to do this, Xcode will give you a warning saying, "Protocol methods must not have
bodies."
So it only has this part. It can't have any curly braces and any implementation. Now, that we've created
this can fly certificate with a fly method that must be implemented by everyone who says that they can
fly,
we can now go ahead and delete our fly method from our Bird class because not all birds can fly.
And instead, we can say that our birds which can fly, our Eagle class, for example, well, they're going to
adopt the CanFly protocol. And as soon as we do this, we get a error from Xcode telling us that you
said that eagles can fly, but you haven't actually implemented a fly method in here.
So if we click on this and we say, "Fix," well then it's going to add the fly method that is required by
this CanFly protocol.
And in here, I'm going to add a print statement that says, "The eagle flaps its wings and lifts off into
the sky."
So my eagle can fly because it implements the fly method,
so it satisfies the requirements of my protocol.
So the Eagle now has this protocol or this certification. And my penguin is not going to get this
CanFly certification.
It's just a bird.
It has feathers, it has wings, it can swim,
it can lay eggs, but it can't fly.
But my airplane, on the other hand, now no longer has to be a class.
It can be a struct because we actually don't need to inherit anything.
Instead, it's also going to adopt the CanFly protocol.
So protocols can be adopted by structures or classes.
It's not like inheritance, it's not limited to classes.
So now my airplane has this CanFly protocol, so it must implement the required method which is flying.
If you say that you can fly,
you must have an implementation.
So "The airplane uses it engine to lift off into the air."
And now in my flyingMuseum, rather than limiting my flyingDemo to using flying objects that are birds,
I'm going to use a different data type.
I'm going to use the CanFly protocol as a data type
So now I'm saying that when my flyingMuseum puts on a flyingDemo, it requires a flying object
that is something that adopts this protocol, because I know that when they adopt this protocol, they definitely
have a fly method implemented.
So I'm pretty sure that I'm not going to embarrass my museum by trying to demo a object that can't fly.
Now, down here, my plane can no longer lay eggs because it's now just a simple structure that is an airplane,
but it does adopt the CanFly method.
Now, myEagle is able to fly. myPenguin is not able to fly, but it can do all of the other things that
birds can do because it's still inheriting from the Bird class.
But my airplane is now able to fly. And more importantly, when I put on my flyingDemo at myMuseum, I
can now pass in myEagle which is able to go in here because it adopts the CanFly protocol.
I can also pass in myPlane because it also adopts the CanFly protocol, but I can't pass in myPenguin
because it does not adopt the CanFly protocol.
So now instead of using inheritance where I'm saying my eagle inherits from the Bird class and my penguins
inherit from the Bird class, and if birds are able to fly, then all the subclasses of birds, eagles and
penguins all get this capability which it may or may not actually need.
But on the other hand, when my airplanes actually need this CanFly ability, it can't really inherit
from birds because it doesn't satisfy the other things that birds can do like laying eggs.
Now, because we've learned about protocols, we can make our code much better.
We can simply adopt that CanFly protocol everywhere where we need that capability.
So our airplanes become a type that can fly, our eagles also become a type that can fly,
and it means that we're assured that when we use an eagle or when we use an airplane, because it's marked
as CanFly, it will definitely have a fly method implemented.
This is our protocol in action. And as we mentioned, structures can adopt protocols,
classes can adopt protocols, but you can also adopt multiple protocols. All you have to do is after the
name of your structure or your class,
you add a set of colons and you add your protocols one after the other
separated by commas.
Now, if you are creating a class and it needed to be able to inherit from a superclass,
well, in this case, you're Superclass comes first.
So it's going to be the name of the class, colon, the name of the Superclass, and then the protocols come
after the Superclass separated, again, by commas. If you'd like to know more about protocols and how they
work in detail,
I recommend browsing through the Swift Language Guide on protocols.
As always, you'll find a link in the course resources.
But let's get back to our app. So now that we've seen what protocols are, we can see that all
UITextField delegate is in fact just a protocol with a whole bunch of requirements. And those requirements
are methods for implementing the textFieldShouldBeginEditing, the textFieldShouldEndediting, et cetera,
and all of these things.
But why is it a delegate? And how is it able to trigger all of these delegates? And what does it mean
when we said the search field's delegate as this current class?
Well, we'll explore all of that by doing another Deep Dive in the next lesson
where we look at the delegate pattern using Swift protocols. So for all of that and more, I'll see you on the
next lesson.